---
title: "On Fascism"
description: "Fascism is a cult of the archaic fitted out by modern technology."
image: /static/images/2019-09-25-on-fascism-police.webp
tags:
  [
    essays,
    fascism,
    anti-fascism,
    capitalism,
    society-of-the-spectacle,
    late-capitalism,
  ]
---

![Cop photo by Alec Favale](/static/images/2019-09-25-on-fascism-police.webp)

Fascism is an expensive to maintain state-of-siege by the capitalist economy
attempting to defend itself by an irrational means. Fascism rallies to the
defense of the conservative bourgeois ideology of the family, private property,
the moral order, and patriotic nationalism. It unites the petty-bourgeois, the
unemployed who have been hurt by the crisis or disappointed by the impotence of
the socialist revolution‒ it is not by its nature fundamentally ideological, but
may exhibit ideology to suit its needs. Its strength is how it presents itself
truthfully as a violent resurrection of mythic past origins‒ to claim the past
as a “Golden Age” and a return to the success of this golden past. It demands
participation in a community held together by mythical archaic pseudo-values:
race, blood, and the leader.

_Fascism is a cult of the archaic fitted out by modern technology._ It revives
and recreates its myth (both past and present) through the spectacle using
speeches, television, radio, internet, and pop culture. It is a major factor in
the formation of the modern spectacle. The false mythology of this “Golden Age”
is one of the fundamental factors of contemporary society, and was a primary
factor in the destruction of the workers movements of the past.

Fascism however, is the most costly means of preserving a capitalist order due
to the scale and effort required of the state to enforce the authoritarian rule
of a minority with a police state apparatus. Fascism is unsustainable in the
long-term, and must be pushed aside by a more efficient and rational form of
power; neoconservative or neoliberal representational democracy being typical
contemporary examples.

<aside>
  _This was an excerpt from "The Society of The Spectacle" a forthcoming new book
  by 0xADADA which reinterprets the original by Guy Debord._
</aside>

<div className="hanging-indent">
  <cite>
    Debord, G. (1983).
    <em>The society of the spectacle</em>.
    Trans. Fredy Perlman.
    Detroit: Black & Red, Print.
  </cite>

  <cite>
    Debord, G. (1994).
    <em>The society of the spectacle</em>.
    New York: Zone Books.
  </cite>

  <cite>
    Debord, G. & Knabb, K. (2014). 
    <em>The Society of the spectacle</em>.
    Berkeley, CA:
    Bureau of Public Secrets.
  </cite>
</div>
